And the main banks are on our banking inquiry.
Six months on. So, welcome, uh, thank you for your,
uh, written submission.
We look forward to hopefully some introductory comments,
and then we'll throw it out, open to questions.
So nice for you to be here.
Thank you. So, uh,
and thanks for the invitation to speak again.
Um, pleased to be joined today by my colleague, Adam Boyd.
Adam runs our personal bank, uh, and a lot of the products
and services we've been talking about.
Um, Adam looks after, um, uh, just a couple
of reflections actually before we start.
I think the committee's report
and the recommendations have been really helpful, uh, and it
provided an important spotlight on the sector.
I think while the individual recommendations are not silver
bullets, when you take them in aggregate
and you allow them time to embed,
they definitely provide a way forward
to a more competitive market.
I think, uh, a couple of, um,
highlights would be the changes for capital.
Uh, so the reduced capital requirements
for small banks will increase their ability to compete
for large banks, the different capital stack.
Some components come at a lower cost December.
The record switching that we saw, uh, in December,
I think is really putting to bed both the perception
and the reality of customers being able to move around
and shopping for a good deal.
And I genuinely think we are making better progress on
supporting iwi, hapu small businesses
with access, uh, to capital.
So there's more work to be done.
We realize this and we are looking forward to working
with government, um, our regulators and industry partners.
I do think there's a real opportunity
to take a step back at this juncture also,
and to really reflect on how all
of these component parts come together, how they aggregate
with all of the regulatory work already underway
to make sure that we're striking the right balance
between safety and competition
and between lowest cost and innovation.
And I think there's a really good opportunity for kofa, uh,
in that regard and with those reflections.
Okay. Open to questions.
Okay. Who's up? The first question. Okay.
Okay, we'll go, we'll go. Deputy chair on Hamilton.
Thanks chair. And thanks for your, um, presentation.
Um, just wanna explore further
disclosing profitability on transactions on
call and savings account.
And you've given obviously an example of other jurisdiction,
and, and I think it's a fair point that it's possibly hard
to, hard to measure given there's so much variability across
your volume, size, et cetera.
But is that also a little bit of a, um, a duck for cover?
Like, you know, I mean, obviously to me,
if I was being cynical that I'd say, well,
there's still obviously a profitability element
that's embedded in there.
Um, how might we get a more granular
understanding of what's going on there?
Yeah, great. Uh, so the FMA
as you know, is leading that work.
And so we'll partner with the FMA, um, uh,
on the development of that question.
But I think the thing for me is New Zealanders need access
to transaction accounts.
Um, every New Zealander needs that access.
It needs to be easy for them,
and transaction accounts need to be free
and do the things that they should do.
And we've launched a new product to achieve just that.
And Adam will give you a few details on what that is.
Yeah, I think when, when we think about transaction
accounts, there's probably sort of two primary dimensions
that, that we sort of come at it first, as
to Victoria's point is that can we offer a product
that is free to essentially do your basic banking services?
So, um, our account,
we've got about 390,000 customers on it at the moment.
We're projecting that to get
to about 600,000 by the middle of the year.
And with that account, you can obviously open an account,
you can make all of your payments, you can access ATM's,
contact center, branch network
out digital application, uh, et cetera.
So all of your basic needs can be net met for free.
So that's kind of the first dimension.
And then the second one is we just wanna make sure
that customers don't hold unnecessary
balances in those accounts.
So we proactively reach out
to customers if they've got cer certain balances to see,
see whether there's a better product
or service that might meet their needs.
And, you know, by way of example,
we've contacted about 210,000 customers in the last year to,
to, for, to see if there's a, a better way
for them to be banking,
I think. Yeah, sorry. So when
you take that together, I think
free transaction accounts
for all New Zealanders is really good value.
When, when has that, has this, the committee's inquiry, is
that what prompted you that,
or is this obviously a new initiative you mentioned?
So, um, the, the committee did ask questions about
what was the term was a basic banking account.
Um, and so that's what we got on
and launched a basic banking account.
It's a transaction account.
And, and as Adam outlined, those are all
of the services that come for free.
So that was launched in April. April, April.
Okay. And just one more supplementary
if I could share mm-hmm.
When you say proactively reach out, what's the threshold?
Is it certain balance in the account? What's the frequency?
How, how are you using that as a metric and,
and, um, I guess analyzing that data
to continuous improvement?
Yeah, there's various different, um, I guess triggers for
what might, um, for, for reasons why we might reach out
to a customer, a simple one would be if a customer's got
more than $500 in their account, we'll reach out
and suggest that they open up an savings account.
Similar conversations there for term deposits
as well at certain thresholds.
So there's various different ways that we will engage.
Yeah. And what sort of frequency,
Uh, that happens? I
mean, we, it's sort of getting that balancing act, right?
So we wanna make sure that we're not sort
of troubling customers too much with like, contacting them.
And so there'll be, 'cause it won't be the only message
that we're reaching out to them for.
So it will somewhat depend on sort of holistically how,
how often are we talking to them
about all of their banking needs.
Okay.
Okay. Dan, bid. What?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, good to see you again.
Uh, Victoria, um, last time you came
before the committee, I think, um, it's quite the, uh,
the a SB was, um,
very strong in it in your thoughts
that the RBNZ capital requirements were having an adverse
effect on your bank's ability to price lower.
Um, I'm just keen to get a sense from you on
what has been announced in December, uh,
and what that may mean for, you know,
actual reduction in, um,
headline interest rates from a SB bank.
Yeah. So, um, I think, you know, our points
that we were trying to make is that, um,
we are very pro harmonization given
that capital flows our global harmonization
with our other jurisdictions.
And what you can see in the proposals now, um, is
that is greater levels of harmonization,
if you like, as I would describe it.
Um, what it means is that we are still going to have to
increase our capital from today.
We're still gonna have to hold more levels of capital,
but there are some parts of that capital that are going
to be cheaper than they otherwise might have been.
Um, net net, uh,
we don't see any material cost advantages for that stack,
as I call it, that capital stack.
We think the biggest impact
of the changes is the pro competition element, um,
which has been achieved,
you know, to support the smaller banks.
Smaller banks. So the, um, lower requirements?
That's right. That's specifically, yeah. Okay.
So you're saying that actually in terms of from
Today? From
today, yes. Okay.
Yes. Rather than what was gonna be,
we are talking about what from today?
Yes. I don't think it's gonna be material
Compared to today. Okay. Understood.
Um, second area is just
around the, uh, regulations.
So if sent here in your submission around, um, the Council
of Financial Regulators
and you're keen to see a greater role of the Ministry
of Regulation, um, any areas
where you wanna put it on record today
that you think the Council
of Financial regulators should prioritize?
Mm-hmm. Um, 'cause there's many different regulators,
there's a lot of overlap.
Yes. Which we've heard here, uh, on countless occasions
in the bank's view.
What are the areas that they should have as top priority
for, um, streamlining
or, um, being clear on who's responsible
and getting rid of the duplication?
Yes. So, um, let's start with duplication When it occurs,
we do talk to our regulators.
Um, a simple example, we had, um, uh, one, um,
matter, uh, that we were dealing with the primary, a,
a primary regulator on,
and this is a privacy matter,
so the privacy commissioner mm-hmm.
Um, we also had three other regulators, um, interested, uh,
and all asking different questions in different ways.
And so what we did is we just let them all know
and said, Hey, listen, we are dealing
with our primary regulator on this matter,
and we are happy to provide all
that information directly to you.
Um, but what we didn't wanna do is talk
to four different regulators with different questions
and have different information flowing.
So the point of that being that when there are, um,
overlaps, um, as an example, we try and point that out.
Yes. I think the really big opportunity though is in the UK
they, they operate a thing called the regulatory grid.
Mm-hmm. And that's something that Australia is taking up,
I think it's something New Zealand should take up.
And that grid basically, um, looks at all
of the regulatory change on foot and tries to create
or remove heavy periods, um, of regulatory work.
So I think that's a really, um, helpful tool.
Um, and then secondly, what I would say is that I do think
that there's this opportunity for regulators
to come together and think about the system in its entirety
rather than through individual lenses to see if the system
as a whole, if we are striking that right balance.
So what I mean, um, I'm very conscious
that we've had two decades of the most benign credit impact.
Uh, and, you know, we've gotta make sure
that we are setting ourselves up for the system
of the future and for the environment of the future,
not just addressing the past.
Uh, and so I think there's a good opportunity for COVID
to really think about all of these changes.
Are they setting us up for the future
that we're going into? Yeah.
Great. Thank you. Okay. I'm gonna go to Dr. Debra Russell.
Um, thank you. I'm just very satisfied a SB customer here.
Just thank you.
Um, uh, and, um, I know Williams, uh,
sent her apologies for not being here today.
She had a commitment elsewhere,
but she wanted me to ask about, um,
asbs bad debt provisions.
Yes. Which she says have fallen from, um,
I think 17 million to 3 million.
It doesn't seem like a lot to me in the first place anyway,
given the size of your operation.
But that's still quite a sizable, um,
decrease in your bad debt debt provisions.
What have you done? That's
So, um, that number also, by the way, is small relative
to the total provisions that we are holding, um,
which would be, you know, more sick, the 600 million, so
that's year on year Yeah.
Shift. Yeah. Um,
but what we are seeing that I think is really positive, um,
uh, we have seen, um,
an improving situation for our customers.
Uh, so a couple of stats that would be top of mind,
a 25% decrease in customers who are having difficulty
with credit cards, a 20% decrease in customers
who are having difficulty with home lending.
Uh, and so, you know,
the interest rate environment has definitely been really
supportive in that regard.
And we've got better processes
and systems now to support people earlier,
uh, than ever before.
And then on the business front, um,
we are seeing similar trends.
So we are seeing a reduction, um, in businesses
and difficulty as well.
So all of that, um, bodes well.
Yep. One of the things, um, in that business space
that we know that has been happening is
that inland revenue has been getting more
proactive in chasing after,
Uh, Tax debt.
Yes. Is that impacting on some of your operations as well,
in terms of sustaining some of those? Cut?
Um, so we are aware of that dynamic.
Um, and particularly I think some of the lending
that came off, um, the COVID period as well from, um,
but, uh, obviously when businesses, we have noticed a lot
of businesses are choosing
to go into receive ship themselves.
Uh, and, um,
and that obviously impacts, um, all of the accreditors.
So, yeah. So yes.
Okay. Thank you. Okay, Nancy, Luke,
thank you Chair and welcome, Victoria.
Good to see you again. Um,
I am interested in the real time payments area, so I know
that you, you welcome our recommendation
and pushing forward more modernization I do nationally and,
and also meeting international, um, I guess
behaviors and services that consumers, uh, relate to.
And I particularly note in Asian countries
where real time payment, they kind of went from, uh,
a savings or check transaction account
or checkbook to straight, uh,
bypassing all the credit cards stage
and went straight to the real time payments.
Um, I know that you've answered
and said that, you know, you're supporting the Reserve Bank
and government agencies setting up that payments roadmap,
but for a SB for you Yeah.
And for the work that you do internationally
and with your mother, mother bank in Australia,
what do you see is the consumer behavior driving there,
the, the improvement in the services?
And what can you do proactively to recommend back
to the Reserve Bank and the government to improve
That? Yes.
Uh, real time payments.
The, the question is when do you really need them? Mm.
When do you need a payment to be absolutely instantaneous?
And when is it okay to, um, uh, for it not
to necessarily be instantaneous?
So one of the developments that the industry has made, um,
collectively is there have been requirements, um,
for global payments, um, improvements.
So, um, the domestic banks in New Zealand
settle seven days a week.
We settle on half an hour, um,
and we can continue to improve on
that half an hour timeframe.
So I think there's work that the industry can do,
and now that's not real time.
The one thing that I think we really, uh,
and I've been pretty consistent on this, um,
and it's not necessarily a popular view, uh,
but we've gotta make sure that we get on top of frauds
and scams because real time payments is real time frauds
and scams, and it is impossible
to get the money back once it's gone, um, in that real time.
So that is the one thing
that I wanna be really thoughtful about.
Uh, and so I see the work in payments going hand in hand
with the work that we're doing, for example,
through the New Zealand Antis Scam Alliance,
which I think is starting
to make real progress on tackling scams, um,
as a real collective.
So I'd like to see those two pieces work come together.
And what are you studying internationally in other
jurisdictions in terms of that working
Together? Yeah, so,
um, we've done a lot of work looking
around the world around how these things are working.
Um, one of the trends that we are seeing is, um,
a lot more coming together around the concept
of economic crime, which is cyber.
Mm-hmm. And, um, frauds and scams
and other forms of crime that are developing.
I don't think we've yet seen, um, uh, payments and frauds
and scams come together in a way that I think we could,
because we've got the advantage of being a small country,
um, and the advantage of very similar group
of, um, participants.
Uh, and so that's what I'd like to see.
I think we can do something really good together here
if we bring the two together.
Okay. Do we have a quick question from
Dr. David Wilson? Oh,
Well, that's a, uh, sub to what we've been talking about.
Um, thank you very much on real-time payments,
and you mentioned about frauds and so on.
And the fact that the settlement at the moment is like 30
minutes, which, you know, it's a reasonable amount of time.
Um, heard from others though that, um,
real-time payments have been around for a long time
and other jurisdictions,
and subsequently with the rise in birds
and scams that, uh, this notion
of real time fraud detection is also happening
and where people are using algorithms
to detect unusual activity.
Yes. And this is already happening,
Is we do it all the time. We've been doing it for years.
Okay. Okay. Right.
I think, we'll, I think we'll leave it at that.
So, um, thank you, uh, Victoria.
Short, uh, short and, um, Adam Boyd, the chair
of a SB, we appreciate that.
And can I say that your government relations communications
team are bang on
and have delivered beautifully on the brief with their very,
uh, succinct answers, uh, to recommendations of the, um,
to the recommendations that pertain to you.
So thank you for your written
submission as well. Great. Thank
You. Thank you. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Right.
That brings us to, uh, the a NZ,
and we've got, um, Antonio Watson here, chief executive
and Scott St.
John Chair. So welcome, Mr. St. John and Mrs. Watson.
Thank you.
Next Chair. Um, good afternoon everyone, and,
and thank you for having us.
Um, you've had the chance to read our submission.
I had two quick points that I wanted to make
before we started,
but Victoria made both
of them exactly the way I would've made them.
One was around the Reserve Bank's capital Review.
Um, it didn't go as far as the committee recommended,
which was to stop at now, but it has improved.
And I think her, um, point about the pro competitiveness
of it has been a particular feature of it.
And the second one is competition.
We obviously welcome competition. It makes us better.
We absolutely support the committee's work in that space.
And I was gonna use December as an example as well, of some
of the absolutely fierce competition we've seen lately.
And certainly if you talk to anyone on our front lines,
they'll tell you a bit.
And competition in our case isn't just price, it's price,
it's approval process, it's incentives
that we're being offered, it's turnaround
times, all those kind of things.
So, um, happy to answer any questions.
Okay. Um, I, I'll kick it off with, um, we've, we had, um,
a FinTech entrepreneur present last week.
And in his submission, he's, uh, respectfully requested
that this committee committee consider holding the banks
and financial services industry to account for
how they engage and support local
fintechs without genuine engagement
and support from the incumbent banks.
Uh, those local FinTech companies risk failing
because they can't, uh,
before they can scale, um, to, to, to an adequate amount.
And so I, I put it to you, what's the a NZ
as the biggest show in town, if you like.
What's your response to concerns around from fintechs
around support and engagement
And, and that it's difficult when you're
a small startup business?
And I absolutely acknowledge that, um,
the regulatory sandbox that has been created,
and I know you heard a little bit about that,
is a help in that space.
'cause that allows a proof, sort of a proof
of concept is what you are doing.
Correct. But we actually welcome, we are,
we are net deep in modernizing our banking platforms.
We've got old legacy platforms, if I'm honest, you know,
going back a couple of years,
fintechs would approach us with a great idea.
We'd feel slightly sick
because we would know how hard it would be to plum in
with the great idea.
Um, open banking and the,
and the API standards help with that.
But, um, my point being that actually working
with fin, you know, these are people that have great ideas
that stop us needing to do something.
So we are very, very willing to work with them.
We have engaged with all the fintechs that belong
to the A API center at the moment.
We are not directly investing in them at this stage.
I know some of our peers are,
and that's, there's different opinions about whether
that's a good idea or not.
Um, but in terms of being welcoming innovation, that means
that we are not having to do it in house ourselves.
It's just a matter of being able to really, um,
well really easily plug them in.
And the API stands have helped a lot with that.
So I think we'll see a bit more of a, a bell wave of
that coming through now.
Okay. Uh, Ryan Hil,
Thanks and thanks again for your submission.
And, and again, that was probably quite a wholesome one,
so I appreciate the work you put into these.
Um, I guess two questions.
One, um, just in terms of a candid response from you,
obviously the banking inquiry solicit a bit of media
and a bit of attention,
but what do you think has been the significant shift,
if any, in a Z's culture in terms of, you know,
just upping the ante
and appreciate you already
acknowledge your customer focused.
And my second one I'll come
to is around payments New Zealand. Okay.
So, um, upping the ante.
So absolutely, you know, um, the market study
and then followed by this inquiry
and, you know, we welcome the opportunity to continue
to engage it.
It shines a light in the industry
and I think that's helpful.
It holds us to account, um, competition makes us better.
Making sure that the environment is welcome
to competition will make us better.
And as you'll have seen in our submission,
there are a number of the, um, recommendations
that we've already implemented
or are partway through printing
and that will be good for our customers.
And Thank you. And Payments New Zealand,
obviously this came up through the earlier committee,
you know, sessions around the, um, the shareholding.
And, and you guys obviously are a significant
part of that as a NZ.
Um, how do you think that's progressing?
You, you get a bit of criticism around, you know, it's, um,
yeah, Turkey's voting for Christmas a little bit,
but, um, there is a lot of work coming out of it.
There is some pressure from, um, FMA, um, reserve Bank,
you know, all these different entities are wanting
to move towards, we're hearing a lot about real
time payments, et cetera.
But then it's also the spectrum of risk.
How do you think that space is moving?
Um, do you think Payments New Zealand is a bottleneck?
Do you think other people are bottlenecks
or do you think the pace is actually okay?
I think the pace, the payment systems are really difficult
and complex and there aren't many experts in them.
I think that, um, some of the commentary has been around,
you know, as you say, Turkey's voted Christmas.
We kind of had to create Christmas
'cause no one else has done it for us.
So, for example, payments, New Zealand owns the API center
that's running open banking.
No one else was saying, oh, well let's put
that in a regulated space,
or let's make it a government entity.
So it's sort of, we've done it to ourselves
because we needed to do it to ourselves.
And Payments New Zealand was set up a long time ago to sort
of manage the payment rails of New Zealand.
They, you know, we have to respect their independence.
We do have a seat on the board,
but equally there are independent directors.
Um, we know that they're actively addressing some of the,
um, whether it's perceptional reality about,
about their structure, um, that
actively working on the future of payments.
Now, we would hope that
that would be an aligned conversation with regulators.
'cause we know that the Reserve Bank is actively working
on the same thing.
And I guess another question for you, uh, we've got, um,
Adrian from Blink Pay.
There was an article came out I think yesterday saying
he actually feels we can make big advances on open banking
under the current rails.
Um, whereas others might say, let's look at India, who,
who built a completely new, um, uh,
payment system New Zealand.
What's your view? Have we got enough?
Can we, can we maximize the current infrastructure?
Or, and or do we need to continue investing in the new?
I I very much like the idea of being able
to maximize the current infrastructure and develop on it.
Because India was started in a very different position.
They started in a position
where money was changing hands in cash
and markets, you know, the,
the money lender was charging at some
egregious interest rate for borrowing money.
And what they've done is phenomenal,
but we are not in their starting position.
Mm-hmm. So I think, you know,
Adrian's ideas about whether we can use even the open
banking rails to help
with real time payments in certain circumstances,
it wouldn't be all circumstances,
but back to some of the points that have been made,
you need to look at the use cases.
I mean, I'm very happy
and I think most merchants are very happy
that I can pay instantly.
They know that my, they, they know I'm good for the money,
so we have to look at the use cases as well.
So I think that something very, um, very deliberate
and focused on where we are now, where we'd like to get to,
and the easiest way to get there.
Because every dollar we spend on payments,
we're not spending on some other form of innovation.
So we just need to be careful
that we balance across the industry
where we want the innovation to appear. Thank
You. Okay. Uh,
Dan Bidar.
Thank you Chair. Uh, good to see you both again.
Um, in the previous submission you made a case
that the old capital ratio requirements were going
to have a quantum impact on your, uh, level
of interest rates in the order of 45 to 75 basis points.
Uh, and you're saying you suggested that at the point of
Vem, which is a few months ago, um, the,
the current cost was about 25 basis points in light of
what the Reserve Bank announced last year, uh, admitting
that it is not as far as you wish it to go.
Um, has the a NZ as the biggest bank, the mother
of all bank in New Zealand, um, uh,
done any analysis on the cost savings
as a basis point from the Reserve Bank
capital requirement changes?
Yeah, so, so the Reserve Bank said when they,
when they announced the changes that they felt that
that would be, I think it was seven
to 15 points less upward pressure on interest rates.
So don't forget, this is a, we're talking about the future.
We are where we are. Um, we see that as, as, um, on average
as a six basis points,
less upward pressure on interest rates, um,
that will manifest differently over our portfolio.
The more risky lending that will be more of a,
I'm not gonna say a saving
'cause it isn't necessarily a drop from now.
It's a less, less of that upward pressure
because we are not having to put as much
of the more expensive types
of capital in particular into the, into our capital stack.
Okay. So still an increase, but six basis
Points, but less, but less. So.
Thank you. Okay. Any other questions, members? No.
Um, the, uh, Prudential Policy Committee,
the financial policy committee
that the Reserve Bank announced, uh,
its charter has been rolled out
and its, uh, um, uh, members are being, uh, organized
and the first meeting is, uh, imminent.
Um, what do you think should be its priorities, uh,
for the financial policy committee,
the nons statutory committee
that the Reserve Bank have set up?
I think that goes back to some
of the conversation already, which is around, um, we,
we strongly believe that the more we can be, um, consistent
with other like jurisdictions, for example, the more
that we can be consistent, um, across regulator
and make sure that each regulator's playing, you know,
playing a particular role.
I think it's around those sorts of things.
Just making sure we are very deliberate about
where regulation is really important because,
or, you know, it is really important that we have a safe,
stable, trusted banking, um, banking, um, system.
But there is a balance on, you know, the cost of borrowing
or the friction we have in our payment systems or,
or lots of different things that need to be balanced out.
So I think it would be, you know, a really sensible,
where are we going to land on that spectrum
of dead safe banks to, you know,
incredibly innovative banks,
but maybe we might lose some trust in 'em in the community.
So we, we are on that spectrum, do we want
to be as a country?
Because that's not a decision that banks can make.
That's a decision for government and regulators, I think.
Mm-hmm. Um, in November, you posted a, uh,
$2.53 billion profit for the A NZ.
Um, how do you think 2026
or your next financial year is, is tracking?
Um, so that, that I can't give you the
forward looking information.
Obviously that's, um, that's, um, sensitive,
market sensitive information.
But what we're seeing this year is we had an, um,
a one-off in that, in that number, so that we have, um,
some hedging that sort of fluctuates around.
So when you peel that back, our profit was lower.
Um, we would ex we wouldn't expect it
to be significantly higher, significantly lower.
Um, things are the, when you look at the,
the economic environment, we are very well
provided for bad debts, which tends to be
where you see big bank losses.
Our margins are stable to downward,
downward pressure on them
because of the interest rate environment at the moment.
So that's kind of where we'd be looking at similar,
you know, slight, you know, somewhere modestly
above our cost of capital
returns is really what we're looking for. You
Get a modicum of market growth.
Yeah. And there's obviously market growth every year.
Mm-hmm. First home buyer, um, market, that category is,
uh, seems to be stronger than ever in the, in a generation.
Is that certainly reflecting in the
business and lending that you are doing?
Yes, absolutely. We're really seeing first time buy,
first time buyers come to the market.
Part of that I think is house price.
You know, interest rates have come down,
house prices have stabilized, um,
so there's a bit more certainty there.
Um, and incomes have grown over the last few years as well.
So that's been really pleasing to see.
Okay. Any other questions or observations members? No. No.
Okay. Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you for your written submission
and, uh, appearing before us today.
Thank you. Okay.
That brings us to the com column affectionately
called the ComCom.
Um, and we've got, uh, Dr. John Small here as Chair
and colleague and and me head of market studies.
Ah, good afternoon to you both. Thank you for your patience.
We, we are running author of the report that
there's not one author to that sort of thing
that of the project.
Yeah. There's many fa there's many fathers
or mothers to success, isn't it?
Absolute. Okay. Um, right.
We look forward to your introductory comments.
We've got your supplementary, uh, uh, submissions here,
and, uh, then we'll open up for questions.
Yeah. Thanks very much for the, for the, for the time.
Um, uh, so as you know,
the comm Commission's job really is promoting competition.
Um, and, uh, following on from the banking study,
we've been doing quite a bit of follow up work to, um, check
and, and on, uh, the recommendations that we've made, um,
that's been the focus of the report
that we've, we've given to you.
Um, a lot of that is on track.
Um, probably the main sort of multilateral, um, issue
that's outstanding is this, uh, technology
that we think could be, that we've seen working in Australia
that we haven't got in New Zealand that would, um, speed up
and allow mortgage, um, uh, advisors to, uh,
get multiple quotes from banks in a hurry.
So that piece is, is a little bit stuck.
And so anything the committee could do to push that on,
I mean, it's easy to see the reasons why that's stuck.
Um, many of the other recommendations are, are,
are reasonably well on track.
Um, I think probably the only other comment
to make at a high level is that there's been a lot
of talk about open banking
and, um, we think, I guess we see open banking as
a means to an end, uh, rather than end in itself.
It is important that we make it work properly.
Um, but certainly at the commission, the reason
that we thought it was a great thing was
because we, we really want to see actual
moderate scale disruption for the large banks
that you've just been listening to,
and that's yet to happen.
Mm-hmm. Uh, so that, that's, I'll just leave it there. Okay.
We're gonna go to Dr. Deborah SEL first.
Um, thank you. Um,
I think we've been hearing from the large banks,
and there was about a whole lot of switching going on in
December, I presume November, December last year,
as rates sort of bottomed out
and then started to look like they might rise again.
Have you got, did you, did you see that
as an increased level of competition too?
We are getting sort of just slightly conflicting views on
how much switching there really was
between your numbers. And
I I think we're probably working off the same data
so we can all see the data.
Yeah. Um, I, I mean, I had hoped that
that was partly attributable to, um,
the new switching service
that payments New Zealand put in and have been promoting.
Um, I think it's, it's healthy, um,
but people are shopping around a little more.
So that's a, I'd say that's a good sign.
Um, it's also probably a, you know, a product of,
uh, the broader economy.
Um, so I, you know, I think, I think it's,
I think it's healthy in that product space.
Mm-hmm. Okay, Dan? Good. What,
Uh, good afternoon, Dr. Small, good to see you again.
Could you just elaborate on
what the blockage is specifically with this technology?
So I'm guessing it allows mortgage advisors to
submit a quote and get, uh, submit
a customer's profile Yeah.
Or needs, and then you get
multiple quotes back from four banks.
Can you elaborate on, is
that the case and what's the blockage?
Yeah, that's, that's definitely the, the case.
So, um, uh, the, the, yeah, the, the idea is that, um,
one of our concerns in the market study was
that there wasn't the, the,
the mortgage advisors weren't really
facilitating price competition.
Mm-hmm. They're providing services,
but they weren't really putting banks against
each other actively.
And many people only got one quote.
So the system that they have in Australia is almost exactly
like what you just described, that, um, would be a sort
of standardized form that would capture the relevant
customer information or, uh, get sent through.
You could imagine lots
of different technological solutions for that.
Um, but I think the blockage is who's gonna pay for it
and, um, and who wants it and who doesn't want it.
Um, and you know, so we've, we've sort of pushed them
to do this, but we have no other other power ability. You
Push the banks to,
Or both the banks and the mortgage advisors? Yes.
Yeah. Okay. Is it something that maybe payments that
with Payment Zealand as well, or? Yeah.
Well, it could be something, right?
It's not really a payments thing.
Um, and it, I mean, it could be something
that the bank association could be, um, could be, um,
encouraged to, to pursue, um,
Which they are.
The engagement has, has been, uh, has been between the
nz um, the Banking Association
and on the financial advisor side.
Financial advisor nz. Yeah.
And just on the Banker's Association,
they have their own tool that they've launched
that allows you a customer to punch in their details
and then get kind of multiple blended rates from cost.
I'm curious as to Commerce Commissions,
if you've had a look at it, what do you think?
Do you think it's gonna be value add value?
Not, I've got my own personal views, but can you hear
It? It, it's, uh,
I've, I've had a look at it.
Um, it, it's very easy to use, very intuitive
and very quickly gives you a, uh, a comparison across up
to three mortgage offerings, um, what it means
for the base interest rate net of, uh,
cashbacks and other incentives.
So that was a missing piece before the market study.
Um, we had one of the senior economists on the,
on the project comment during the course of the project that
that took her working with an Excel spreadsheet to try
and work it out wasn't that easy.
So it's made that very easy
To do. Great. Okay.
That's good. Thank you. Okay.
Any other questions? Ryan Hamilton?
Oh, we'll go to Dr. David Wilson,
Please. Oh, thank you. Uh,
two questions.
One, the competitive environment for bank.
Uh, second on real, uh, real time payments,
the competitive environment's.
Interesting, isn't it? You've got the, a banking association
that's designed the code for, um, prevention
of scams and that sort of thing.
So it's their own code.
We've got the Banking Ombudsman, which is membership
primarily, and majority of these banks themselves.
We've got payments New Zealand, which is owned by the banks.
Um, we've got get verified now,
which is addressing confirmation of PAYE going by the banks.
Um, this doesn't paint to me too much of a shift.
And added to that, uh, the only fintechs we've seen so far
are now owned by banks.
Yep. What's your thoughts on that competitive
Environment? I think
my take on that is that, is that, um, a lot
of these things are sort of,
because they're brought to
where they are in an evolutionary way.
Um, so get verified was a solution to a problem.
Uh, we've got some concerns with Get verified.
We've been talking to them
and we're, we're, our, our main concerns
around it are about inclusion and, and pricing.
So that's, that's something that we've, we've got running
with them, but rest assured that we're on that,
we're on that, uh, case.
Um, I think Payments New Zealand, where on record as saying,
um, that we think the governance could be, um, a,
a bit, uh, improved.
We think that there's a role for, um, some kind of official
role in there to just,
particularly things like new generations of standards.
So I think these are, these are valuable initiatives
that get us, uh, a decent chunk of the way and get verified
or tell you that they're a great
success 'cause they've done it so quickly.
And I, I, I believe that.
Um, but if it's only partial
and it doesn't, it's not,
it's not including everyone, then that's a problem.
'cause it's, that's a,
that's a really important service in the market now, um,
in terms of the fintechs, yeah, I certainly take your point.
And it goes to the, my opening comment really, which is
that open banking should be a means to an end.
That what we don't want is to see is,
is no change in the existing market structure.
And every time a little FinTech, um,
emerges from our wonderful,
innovative New Zealand community, it gets snapped up
by a big bank that I, in the long term,
I don't think that's where we want to be.
So one of my questions is, why aren't we seeing,
and what would it take, um, to get an at, at scale
native digital competitor with a, with a cost
to income ratio that's competitive
Or more than one?
Yeah. Or more than one. Yeah.
Quite a few more than one. Okay. Realtime payments.
I've heard what contradictory comments on realtime payments.
One from one particular bank said that we,
we want realtime payments to be moving faster
and quicker for consumers,
but there is a catch in terms of, uh, the need
to put some friction in place to prevent forward scams,
et cetera, et cetera, along with things like confirmation
of payee, uh, then heard from somebody else saying that, uh,
well actually this isn't a problem overseas.
We also have real time fraud detection using the right
algorithms in other jurisdictions
don't seem to have it here.
To which Victoria Short said, yes, we do. What your comment?
Um, look, I think it's a, it's a, there's an element
of truth in both sides.
I think, um, real time payments, uh, you know,
the more speed in that would be good, uh, for everybody.
The settlement side of it has to be, um, lined up with
that too, by the way.
So it's not, you know, the,
if you've got two hour settlements
and you've got real time payments, there's a big chunk of
risk just sitting right there.
Um, so, uh, I can see both sides of this, of this picture.
Um, but I, I do think that, um, that we should be, you know,
and I think as get verified, hopefully gets, as, you know,
more inclusive and, and, um, and,
and sharper fraud prevention that we can, um,
we can probably get faster payments.
Uh, one more supplementary,
have you seen any movement in terms
of the understanding from banks in their role
as a receiving bank?
Um, they have new accounts
and this all fits in with trying to understand
what the compensation is
between banks when such things happen
and how we catch these things in real time
Yeah. And move from there.
Yeah. I think, I think this is something that, that the,
you know, this is why I think get verified is potentially a
great solution to a lot of these problems.
But I do think that we need
to make sure it's working properly
because one of the things that, that can potentially do is
to enable data sharing about new accounts in, in a kind
of transparent way that, you know, is pro-competitive
and, and good for everyone.
Okay. You, you note, um, that you're in, in relation
to your own, um, market study, uh,
that you're seeing some strong progress being made across,
uh, recommendations, your own recommendations from, um,
18 months ago, whenever it was, um,
we noticed some positive indications of market,
but also that, uh, more needs to, uh, more remains
to be done, particularly to progress open banking
and to improve competition for home lines.
Now we, as you've also noted, 90%, uh,
of the businesses tied up in the, uh, five leading banks.
So what is the Commerce commission when you're talking
about, um, open banking, progressing, open banking,
improving competition?
What are you asking of the banks?
What are you wanting to see from, from our, uh,
leading five banks say?
So I, I mean the, the asks
that we've been putting out there, um, recently,
and we have been following this up with them,
have been about onboarding and the, and the,
and the allocation of risk
and how they think about, you know, me as a FinTech
and my customers whose, whose risk is that?
Is it my risk or is it your risk? That sort of conversation.
So we've been, we've been trying to, uh,
remove blockages there and,
and trivia along the ones who are a bit slow.
And I think we've done okay at that.
Um, but I, I think I'd say, um, to the broader point
that, um, that, you know, open banking as a means
to any end, it's not, it's not the end in itself.
What we would hope that it would enable would be, uh,
significant competition
for the established large players.
And it hasn't done that yet.
And so that's not something that we go
and ask the banks about 'cause they don't wanna
give us clues on that.
Um, but that is something
that we are thinking about internally.
Okay. Well, Ron,
Thanks chair. Um,
and thanks for your submission.
Um, in your, in it, you talk a little bit about,
obviously further on open banking,
but you say there's a lot more government could do,
and then you do kind of reference the document, um,
I think you published in September
last year around open banking.
So I'd be interested to know
what levers you think government can do to accelerate it.
I'd be interested in your thoughts on payments
New Zealand and some of the discussion.
I don't know if you heard from a couple
of the CEOs we just heard around payments New Zealand,
they'd argue that they're doing pretty good,
but you'd have a different view.
Mm-hmm. Um, and you also touch on minimum requirements
to thrive in that document.
So I just wonder if you could talk through some
of those things that we could take away as government,
as a committee to keep that pressure on that space.
Yeah. Um, so I, I, I, I mean, to me
we are, we're in a situation where the institutions
that we've got, and as Dr. Wilson sort of characterized it,
we've got these various institutions playing various roles
in, in the whole system.
Most of them are, are bank owned,
and that's not necessarily a bad thing
because they've got the technological, um, uh, you know,
expertise and understanding of the,
the customer base and so on.
But what's missing in my view is, and, and,
and the CDR program will help this in some way,
but what's missing is, uh, is a layer of, um,
public interest Yeah.
Um, influence into those institutions
and the way that they're thinking.
So the, the risks are that, that, um,
that are industry owned, um, forum
or arranger of things will do things
that are in the interests of the industry
or the ones who are,
who are the most powerful inside that group.
And so, you know, I, so that's a,
that's a gen quite a general comment, I think,
across those various institutions.
Uh, so we want to keep pressure on those.
I, in answer to the chair's question,
I haven't got an answer to, um, at this point, to how, what,
what is the, what are the blockages?
Why aren't we seeing multiple big
neobanks blowing up in New Zealand
or growing fast in New Zealand?
That's something that we need to work on, in my opinion.
Um, so those are some clues, but, um, I don't have any, but
That's a challenge. 'cause you,
you mentioned, and I'm not being,
I'm not picking on you, but you know,
you say government needs to do more
and then you say it needs more public buy-in.
So how, how does government initiate
public buy-in or vice versa?
How do we get that, you know, that sort of dual approach
around this whole concept?
Yeah. So I think that's the job of the regulators
and you can see the, the reserve bank step stepping up
into a number of these areas.
Um, and I think a very helpful way, um,
the FMA plays a useful role ourselves, have a,
have a different perspective.
We're trying to look at things probably at, uh, uh,
perhaps more on the round and what, you know, what could be
and where might this go.
Um, so I, I think we've all got a role to play here and,
and the, the precise mechanics
and levers are gonna depend on what is the particular issue.
Final question, if I could share, um,
you also referenced in, in that letter things
that government could do around open banking, taxes,
welfare and vehicle licensing.
Oh, yeah, good examples. What
would they look like? What does that look like?
Oh, yeah, no, that looks like
The kiwi, the average Kiwi
that doesn't know, understand what that means.
Well that, that, that looks like, you know, IRD and,
and DSW and, um, organizations like that.
Getting, um, getting in, you know, using the APIs and, um,
and taking services from whoever's the best.
So basically uptake of, um,
of competitive services that are built on
and using, um, the open banking system that we've designed.
So for, for the, you know, the, the hundreds
of us watching our select committee livestream thousands,
uh, thousands, um, is is that to remove someone needs to pay
for a rego online, and it's clunky.
You go into the government website
and into your license plate
and, you know, is this,
is it about the technology behind that?
Is it about the removing the friction in that experience?
Yes. What does that look like?
Yes. Yes. It's, it's, um, it, it, it is that it's it,
and it's, um, and it's potentially other things, um,
alongside that, you know, about, um, I mean we've, uh,
you know, um, I, you know, digital ID
and, um, dealing with, um, a ML type issues, um,
those are, so I, I guess the key point we're making here is
that, is that customer uptake of these competitive services,
uh, to the extent they add add value is very helpful if
government gets in behind them.
Yeah. Because that builds scale to, for the provider
and allows them to, you know, keep their costs down
and provide better value to other people.
That's all we're really saying is
that government is a purchaser of that. Sure.
Okay. Thank you. You note here in your letter that you,
um, continue to work closely with MB and RBNZ
and other regulators.
Um, how confident are you that open banking will deliver
effective and competitive outcomes for consumers
and businesses in New Zealand as of today?
I know Kiwi bank's yet to come online in a, in a
regulatory sense, but, um, how confident are you that,
that the open banking will deliver, uh, effective
and competitive outcomes for consumers?
I, I, I think it's getting better all the time.
So I think it's already, it's already better.
Um, and I think it'll continue to improve,
but as I said a couple times already,
I really don't wanna see a situation where the,
the competitive, um,
and innovative parts of the ecosystem, uh,
constantly being snapped up by the existing big suppliers.
Uh, I think that would, that's an antithesis of what that,
um, what the, the desired outcome would look like.
So I think we can get there, uh, and we're on the way,
but, um, so I'm, I am confident about the direction.
Mm-hmm.
Yes. And you're also encouraging
that this committee keeps its eye on the ball as far
as improving competition, the oversight of
that IE welcoming the ongoing focus
and attention of this committee's, um, important work.
Absolutely. Very much so. Yeah.
I think we're, we're in this together. Mm-hmm.
Okay. Thank you. Any other comments or questions? Members?
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen, from Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay. Members, I think that's all we've got.
Nothing else to resolve or turn our attention to?
I think that takes us to question time.